---
title: "Habit Tracker"
subtitle: "Part 3: Encouraging the user"
permalink: "/projects/habit-tracker/part-3.html"
categories: [project]
layout: project
---
This is **Part 3** of the **Habit Tracker** project series. In this part, we're going to add random encouraging messages to show the user.

## The series

* [Part 1 - Creating the layout]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-1 %})
* [Part 2 - Adding a habit]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-2 %})
* Part 3 - Encouraging the user
* [Part 4 - Resetting a habit]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-4 %})

----------

Sheets has a number of built-in **triggers**. These are functions that will be triggered if certain events occur, such as opening a Sheet or editing a Sheet. We'll take advantage of the **onEdit** trigger to display an encouraging message to the user whenever they click a habit's checkboxes.

First, let's create four arrays containing encouraging messages. From the Apps Script **File** menu, select **New â†’ Script file**. Name the file `constants`.

Type or copy-paste this code into the file:

{% capture code %}
const SUCCESS = [
  'Great job!',
  'You did it!',
  'Awesome!',
  'ðŸ‘',
  'Nice job!',
  'Well done :)'
];

const ALMOST_THERE = [
  'Keep it up!',
  'Almost there!',
  'Looking good!',
  'You got this!',
  'Just a few more!'
];

const GETTING_STARTED = [
  'You can do it!',
  'Believe in yourself!',
  'One step at a time',
  'Make every day count'
];

const NEW_HABIT = [
  'Ready, set, go!'
];
{% endcapture %}
{% include code.html lang=js code=code title="constants.gs" %}

Feel free to add even more messages, if you'd like.

There are also a few colors we'll be using. Let's define them now.

{% capture code %}
// ... previous code ...

const PURPLE = '#351c75';
const WHITE = '#ffffff';
{% endcapture %}
{% include code.html lang=js code=code title="constants.gs" %}

Go back to your **Code.gs** file and add a new function called **onEdit**.

{% capture code %}
function onEdit(e) {
  var ss = SpreadsheetApp.getActiveSpreadsheet();
  var ws = ss.getActiveSheet();
  var row = e.range.getRow();
}
{% endcapture %}
{% include code.html lang=js code=code title="Code.gs" %}

We start by getting a reference to the sheet, then we grab the row that was edited using **e.range.getRow()**.

Wait. What's **e**? Functions associated with events, such as **onEdit**, are provided a payload containing information about the event that occurred. You can call it whatever you'd like, but we'll call it **e**, for simplicity.

Next we'll use a still-to-be-written function called **updateHabitStatus**.

{% capture code %}
function onEdit(e) {
  // ... previous code ...
  
  // Ignore the first two rows which just contain instructions
  // and headers. Also, make sure there is a habit in the row.
  if (row > 2 && ws.getRange(row, 1).getValue() != '') {
    // Get the full row the edited cell is in.
    var range = ws.getRange(row, 1, 1, 17);
    updateHabitStatus(ws, range);
  }
}
{% endcapture %}
{% include code.html lang=js code=code title="Code.gs" %}

{% capture content %}
Why not put the <b>updateHabitStatus</b> code right in this function? The finished version of the habit tracker will make use of the <b>updateHabitStatus</b> function elsewhere. In the spirit of DRY (<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don%27t_repeat_yourself" target="_blank">Don't Repeat Yourself</a>), we'll put the code in its own function.
{% endcapture %}
{% include message.html type="is-dark" title="Reusable code" content=content %}

Here's **updateHabitStatus** in its entirety:

{% capture code %}
function updateHabitStatus(ws, range) {
  var row = range.getRow();
  var count = ws.getRange(row, range.getLastColumn()).getValue();
  var cell = range.getCell(1, 1);
  var textArray = NEW_HABIT;
  var cellColor = PURPLE;
  var textColor = WHITE;
  
  // The message depends on how many days the user has completed.
  if (count == 14) {
    textArray = SUCCESS;
  } else if (count > 7) {
    textArray = ALMOST_THERE;
  } else if (count > 0) {
    textArray = GETTING_STARTED;
  }
  
  cell.setBackground(cellColor);
  cell.setFontColor(textColor);
  var t = textArray[Math.floor(Math.random() * textArray.length)];
  cell.setValue(t);
}
{% endcapture %}
{% include code.html lang=js code=code title="Code.gs" %}

Hopefully, it's fairly readable. First we grab the cell containing the count of how many checkboxes are checked in the row. Then we grab the first cell in the row and set some default values.

Next, we decide which array to choose a message from: if all 14 days are checked, we'll display a congratulations message; if fewer are checked we'll choose a message from the other arrays. If no checkboxes are checked, the default message from **NEW_HABIT** will be shown.

Finally, we randomly select a message from the appropriate array and enter in the first column of the row.

You can test it out by going back to the sheet and checking a box. The message in the first column of the row should update.

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/habit-tracker/part-3.gif" caption="Testing it out" %}

------
In Part 4, we'll add the ability to clear the checkboxes in a row.

{% capture next_post %}
  {% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-4 %}
{% endcapture %}

{% include continue.html url=next_post %}