---
title: "Habit Tracker"
subtitle: "Part 1: Creating the layout"
start_here: true
top_image: "/assets/images/habit-tracker/top-image.png"
permalink: "/projects/habit-tracker/part-1.html"
description: "Let's build a habit tracker that actually works!"
categories: [project]
layout: project
---

My 2019 goals were ambitious. I set out to:
* record an EP,
* pass the grade 4 piano exam (starting from grade 1), and
* finish developing a web app I had halfway completed. 

I spent the first several months of the year dividing my attention between these three projects before setting them all aside when I realized I was spending too much time on hobbies that were taking me away from my friends and family.

As I was going through my annual reflection process over the 2019 Christmas holidays, there was a question I struggled to answer:

> What were your biggest failures?

While technically I failed to complete *any* of my goals, it was because I had realized partway through the year that my goals didn't align with my values. This was an important lesson for me. It helped me choose better goals for 2020 and prioritize them in a way that aligns with my values. I see this "failure" as a success in that I learned more about myself and what's really important to me.

Here are my goals for 2020:
* Make <span class="blog-font">Suite Knowledge</span> a thing,
* Complete the Improv Levels 1-5 courses offered by a local comedy club, and
* Get into bouldering.

Notice that two of those goals get me out of the house and interacting with other people. I also promised myself (and my wife) that I would never prioritize <span class="blog-font">Suite Knowledge</span> over doing activities with her or friends and family.

## Alright, get to the point...
Setting goals is the easy part, though. How do you actually achieve them?

I made a spreadsheet last year to track how often I was programming and practicing piano. It was discouraging to look back on the week and see multiple missed days. 

For many people, tracking their goals and habits is one of the things that ends up discouraging them the most. 

> A lot of goal tracking apps try to motivate you by tracking your longest streak, but more often than not you just end up feeling terrible when you miss a day, and that discouragement is sometimes all it takes for you to give up.
>
> It doesn’t have to be that way.

Productivity guru Thomas Frank has a great suggestion in his video <i><a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Les3lZaE3w" target="_blank">How to Actually Stick to Your Resolutions This Year</a></i>.

He recommends setting goals (or resolutions, or habits) for two weeks. **Just two weeks**. When you get to the end of the two weeks, re-evaluate:
* Is this still a goal I care about?
* Is this adding value to my life?

If you can answer yes to those questions, continue tracking the habit for another two weeks. If the answers are a resounding no, get rid of it.

The beauty of this approach is that every two weeks **you wipe the slate clean**. If you failed to achieve your goal or implement a habit, it’s in the past now. If you had a beautiful 14-day streak going, that’s in the past, too.

It also allows you to intentionally and thoughtfully re-evaluate your goals, priorities, and values regularly throughout the year, instead of letting it be an end-of-the-year afterthought.

## What are we building?
We’re building a habit/goal/resolution tracker based on Thomas Frank’s suggestion. It’s going to empower and encourage us. We’re going to be in charge of our goals, not the other way around.

Here’s what the finished version looks like:

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/habit-tracker/result.png" %}

Using it is straightforward:
1. Click **Add New Habit**.
1. Give the habit a name.
1. If you make progress on the goal or habit today, check the box.
1. When you get to the end of the two weeks, reflect and choose to continue or delete the habit/goal.
1. If you choose to continue the habit, hit the **Clear Selected Habit** to uncheck the checkboxes for that habit.

{% include message.html type="is-info" title="Tip" content="Please, if you managed to complete the habit or goal every day, don’t keep a record of that anywhere (i.e. don’t try to track a streak beyond two weeks). Just give yourself a pat on the back, clear the row, and start fresh the next day." %}

Alright, enough introduction. Let’s build this thing!

## What skills are we going to learn?
We'll be writing an Apps Script that can:
1. Insert new rows.
1. Check and uncheck checkboxes.
1. Style cells.

## The series

* Part 1 - Creating the layout
* [Part 2 - Adding a habit]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-2 %})
* [Part 3 - Encouraging the user]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-3 %})
* [Part 4 - Resetting a habit]({% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-4 %})

-------



-------
Great! Next we'll code the logic that makes it work.

{% capture next_post %}
  {% post_url /habit-tracker/2020-01-13-part-2 %}
{% endcapture %}

{% include continue.html url=next_post %}