---
title: "Codenames"
subtitle: "Part 5: Connecting UI elements to functions"
permalink: "/projects/codenames/part-5.html"
---
This is **Part 5** of the **Codenames** tutorial series. In this part, we're going to bring our buttons to life by connecting them to the game logic we programmed.

# The series
* [Part 1 - Creating the word list]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-1 %})
* [Part 2 - Creating the player board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-2 %})
* [Part 3 - Creating the codemaster board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-3 %})
* [Part 4 - Programming the logic]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-4 %})
* Part 5 - Connecting UI elements to functions

All that’s left to do is connect our buttons to their respective functions!

Right-click the **New Game** button. Click the three dots in the top-right corner of the drawing. Choose **Assign script**. Enter `newBoard` and click **OK**.
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part5/newboard.gif" %}

Do the same for the **Reveal Selected Cell** button except we’ll assign the `revealSelectedCell` to it.
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part5/revealselectedcell.gif" %}

We’re done! Let’s test it out.

Try click the **New Game** a few times and make sure new words appear in both the codemaster and player boards. 
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part5/testingnewboard.gif" %}

Make sure the colors are randomized each time as well. 

Select a cell in the player board and click the reveal button. Make sure the color matches what’s on the codemaster board. 
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part5/testingreveal.gif" %}

Try selecting cell **A1** and clicking the reveal button. The message box should appear.
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part5/error.gif" %}

--------
All done!