---
title: "Codenames"
subtitle: "Part 3: Creating the codemaster board"
top_image: "http://clipart-library.com/images/yTkqXknTE.jpg"
permalink: "/projects/codenames/part-3.html"
---
This is **Part 3** of the **Codenames** tutorial series. In this part, we're going to build the board the codemasters use.

# The series
* [Part 1 - Creating the word list]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-1 %})
* [Part 2 - Creating the player board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-2 %})
* Part 3 - Creating the codemaster board
* [Part 4 - Programming the logic]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-4 %})
* [Part 5 - Connecting UI elements to functions]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-5 %})

Right-click the **Main Board** tab and click **Duplicate**. Then rename the new sheet to `Codemaster Board`.

Add two rows to the top. Select rows 1-3 and give them a black background. Set the font color to `white`.

Merge the top row into one long cell and enter the word `Codenames`. Enlarge the font to something like `24` or `36`.

Select cell **B2**. We’re going to use this cell to indicate which team starts first. If the red team starts first we’ll color the cell red, if the blue team starts we’ll color it blue. 

To make it easy to refer to this cell, select it, right-click and choose **Define named range**. Enter the name `color_box` and click **OK**.

In cell **C2** enter the word `starts`.

Select the 5x5 grid **A4:E8**, right-click and choose **Define named range**. Call the range `codemaster_board`.

Finally, let’s create a button the codemasters can click to start a new game. Go to **Insert → Drawing**. Create a rectangle and enter the text `New Board`. Click **Save and Close**. 

Position the drawing so that it is within cell **E2**. If it doesn't fit right, right-click the drawing, click the dots in the top-right corner of the drawing and choose **Edit**, then edit the shape and save it. It took me a few tries to get it just the dimensions just right. 

Right now the button does nothing. Later, we’ll connect it to a function that clears the board, selects new words, and randomly chooses which team goes first.

By now your sheet should look something like this:
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part3/codemasterboard.png" %}

-------
In Part 4, we'll start writing the actual code that will bring our game to life!

{% capture next_post %}
    {% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-4 %}
{% endcapture %}

{% include continue.html url=next_post %}