---
title: "Codenames"
subtitle: "Part 1: Creating the word list"
author: harley
top_image: "http://clipart-library.com/images/yTkqXknTE.jpg"
permalink: "/codenames-part-1.html"
---

I’ve done a variety of programming projects in my spare time, some more useful than others. Many of my favourites have been the ones where I made a computer version of a real board or card game, like my version of Acquire, a stock-buying and hotel chain-building game, that can be played on the command line!

In this tutorial we’re going to build the popular party game <a href="https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/178900/codenames" target="_blank">Codenames</a> in Google Sheets.

## What skills are we going to learn?
This project might seem totally frivolous, but it will actually teach us a number of useful things that will help us become Google Sheets masters. Along the way, we'll learn how to:

1. Write an Apps Script. We’ll format cells programmatically, show error messages in pop-up dialog boxes, and edit the content of cells.
1. Create buttons and connect them to scripts.
1. Create named ranges (spoiler: you'll love them!)
1. Import HTML tables from websites.

And remember, the whole point of this blog is to push Google Sheets to the limit, explore unconventional uses for it, and build your skills. And who says we can’t have fun at the same time?

## What are we building?
First, let me show you what we’ll be building.

In the game Codenames, 25 cards are placed on a table. Each card has a word on it. Some of these words are actually the codenames of spies. Each team, Red and Blue, is trying to make contact with all of their spies, but they don’t know which cards represent their spies, the other team’s spies, innocent civilians, or the assassin.

They make educated guesses by getting hints from their team’s codemaster who knows which cards belong to each team. If your team guesses one of its own spies correctly, you can keep guessing. If your team guesses the other team’s spy or a civilian, your turn ends. If your team guesses the assassin, your team immediately loses!

For a more thorough explanation of the rules, check out <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQVHkl8oQEU" target="_blank">this 3-minute video</a>.

Here’s what our game will look like when built in Google Sheets:

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/1.gif" caption="What we're building." %}

## The series
* Part 1 - Creating the word list
* [Part 2 - Creating the player board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-2 %})
* [Part 3 - Creating the codemaster board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-3 %})
* [Part 4 - Programming the logic]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-4 %})
* [Part 5 - Connecting UI elements to functions]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-5 %})

-------

## Creating the word list

Create a new Sheet. Right-click the tab and rename it `Lists`.

In cell **A1**, enter this formula and hit enter:

`=IMPORTHTML("https://www.talkenglish.com/vocabulary/top-1500-nouns.aspx","table",1)`

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/2.gif" caption="Importing the word list." %}

You might notice it looks like nothing happened!

{% include message.html type="is-dark" title="IMPORTHTML(url, query, index)"
content="This formula lets us import a data table from a website. The <code>url</code> parameter is the website we want the data from. The <code>query</code> parameter tells Google to look for either table (<code>table</code> tags) or list (<code>ul</code> and <code>ol</code> tags) DOM elements. The <code>index</code> parameter selects which result we want in case Google finds multiple tables or lists on the same page." %}

In this case the first `table` element had no data in it, which is why our
 sheet is empty.

Try changing this parameter to `2`.

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/3.png" %}

Nope.

Now try `3`.

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/4.png" %}

Still no luck.

Try `4`.

{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/5.png" %}

Ah, there we go!

Try editing one of the words. You’ll create a `#REF` error because Sheets
needs that space to be blank so it can fill it with the data.
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/ref_error.png" caption="A #REF error" %}

Press <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>+<kbd>Z</kbd> to undo the change and get rid of the error.

There is data in the table that we don’t actually need, plus a few blank
columns. To modify or delete the data we’ll need to copy and paste it as
values instead of using the current formula.

Select column **B** and copy it. Select cell **A1** and press <kbd>Cmd</kbd>+<kbd>Shift</kbd>+<kbd>V</kbd> to
 paste the values. The other columns will disappear since we just overwrote
 the formula that was generating them. Perfect!
 
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part1/6.gif" caption="Copying the data." %}

We’re also going to make two other lists that define the colors of the cells
.

{% include message.html type="is-dark" title="Color palette" content="Recall
that whichever team starts has one extra word to guess. So there will be one
grey cell (the assassin), 7 beige cells (citizens), 8 red cells , 8 blue cells, and one
extra red or blue cell depending on which team is starting." %}

{% include message.html type="is-info" title="Tip" content="Initially I defined the color lists in the Apps Script, but I ended up
 defining them in named ranges which results in cleaner code." %}

In column B enter `#ff9999` nine times, `#ccccff` eight times, `beige` seven
 times, and `grey` once. That should fill the range **B1:B25**. Copy that into
  **C1:C25**. Change C9 to be `#ccccff`. Create a named range for each of these
  ranges: **B1:B25** should be called `red_starts`, **C1:C25** should be called
   `blue_starts`.

`#ff9999` and `#ccccff` refer are the hex codes for a light red and light blue color, respectively. I’m using them because `red` and `blue` are darker colors that made it hard to read the text in the cell. We could have compensated for this by making the font color `white`, but I prefer just choosing lighter shades of red and blue.

-------
Great! Next we'll make a very similar board the codemasters can use to give hints.

{% capture next_post %}
  {% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-2 %}
{% endcapture %}

{% include continue.html url=next_post %}