---
title: "Codenames"
subtitle: "Part 2: Creating the player board"
author: harley
top_image: "http://clipart-library.com/images/yTkqXknTE.jpg"
permalink: "/codenames-part-2.html"
---
This is **Part 2** of the **Codenames** tutorial series. In this part, we're going to build the board players use to make guesses about which colors go with each word.

# The series
* [Part 1 - Creating the word list]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-1 %})
* Part 2 - Creating the player board
* [Part 3 - Creating the codemaster board]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-3 %})
* [Part 4 - Programming the logic]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-4 %})
* [Part 5 - Connecting UI elements to functions]({% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-5 %})

In addition to the word list tab, we’ll also need two other tabs: one for the players to look at, the other for the codemasters to look at which will have the cells colored in.

Create a new sheet. Rename it **Main Board**. We only need 6 rows and 5 columns, so go ahead and delete all the other rows and columns.

{% include message.html type="info" title="Deleting rows and columns" content="To delete a row or column, select the row or column name, right-click and choose the <b>Delete</b> option. You can select multiple rows and columns at a time." %}

Select all of the rows, right-click and select **Resize rows 1-6**. Enter `100` and click **OK**. Do the same for the columns. This will turn the cells into large squares.

Merge the top row cells into one long cell. This cell will hold a button the players can use to reveal a cell’s color.

To create the button, select **Insert → Drawing**. Create a rectangle and enter the text `Reveal Selected Cell` in it. Then click **Save and Close**. 

Position the button so it fits in the first row. If it’s not fitting right you may need to re-open the drawing and edit it from in there. To do this, right-click the drawing, click the three dots in the top-right corner of the drawing, and choose **Edit**. Make some adjustments and save. It took me a few tries to get the dimensions just right.

Right now the button doesn't do anything. Later we'll write a function that reveals the color of a cell and connect it to the button.

Select the 5x5 grid of cells beneath row 1. Right-click and select **Define named range**. In the sidebar enter the name `player_board` and click **OK**.

{% include message.html type="info" title="Named ranges" content="Named ranges make it easier to identify the purpose of a data range when we’re writing formulas. It also makes it faster to type a data range. Plus, Google will help us autocomplete named ranges as we’re typing. We’ll also be referring to our named ranges in our App Script code. Named ranges go a long way to making our code self-documenting (meaning it’s easy to understand what the code is doing without needing lots of comments)." %}

With the 5x5 grid still selected, set the horizontal alignment to **Center**, set the vertical alignment to **Middle**, set the font size to `11`, and choose a font you like (I used **Consolas**). Finally, add a thin black border around all of the cells.

At this point your sheet should look like this:
{% include image.html src="/assets/images/codenames/part2/playerboard.png" %}

-------
Great! Next we'll make a very similar board the codemasters can use to give hints. 

{% capture next_post %}
  {% post_url /codenames/2020-01-13-part-3 %}
{% endcapture %}

{% include continue.html url=next_post %}